---

author: Nate Barksdale
pubDatetime: 2018-02-26
modDatetime: 2025-03-28T14:39:30Z
title: Purpose
slug: purpose
featured: false
draft: false
description: Reviewing six decades of research into the meaning, development, and benefits of purpose in life
emoji: 🌐
tags:

- 🌀 Templeton
  haiku: |
  Languages bridge gaps,
  Words span oceans, connecting—
  Understanding blooms.
  coordinates: [51.509865, -0.118092]

For the John Templeton Foundation, I wrote about the science of purpose.

> Modern scientific research on human purpose has its origins in, of all places, a Holocaust survivor’s experiences in a series of Nazi concentration camps. While a prisoner at Theresienstadt, Auschwitz and two satellite camps of Dachau, Viennese psychologist Viktor Frankl noticed that fellow prisoners who had a sense of purpose showed greater resilience to the torture, slave labor, and starvation rations to which they were subjected. Writing of his experience later, he found a partial explanation in a quote from Friedrich Nietzsche, “Those who have a ‘why’ to live, can bear almost any ‘how.’” Frankl’s 1959 book Man’s Search for Meaning, a book which proved to be seminal in the field, crystallized his convictions about the crucial role of meaning and purpose. A decade later, Frankl would assist in the development of the first and most widely used standardized survey of purpose, the 21-item “Purpose in Life” test.
>
> As part of its ongoing interest in increasing understanding of character and virtue, the John Templeton Foundation commissioned a review of more than six decades of the literature surrounding the nature of human purpose. Covering more than 120 publications tracing back to Frankl’s work, the review examines six core questions relating to the definition, measurement, benefits, and development of purpose.
> [Read more at templeton.org](https://www.templeton.org/discoveries/the-psychology-of-purpose)
